The Greatest Dutch Hits: How Form, Content and Context Affect Song Popularity

Student: Alie Lassche			                  Promotor: prof. dr. Els Stronks | Co-promotor: dr. Folgert Karsdorp

What makes some cultural products more popular than others? Some cultural products happen to be contagious, while others aren’t (Sperber 1996, 1). To answer this popularity-question, songs are an ideal study object for their popularity is ranked by hit charts. Some songs do easily reach #1 of hit charts, others never get close. According to prior studies, (i) songs containing repetitive lyrics stand a greater chance of becoming popular (as in: reaching #1 of the Billboard’s hit chart (Alexander 1996; Nunes, Ordanini, and Valsesia 2015; Ellis et al. 2015)) and (ii) songs which lyrics were judged to be more meaningful and comforting, appeared to be popular during social and economic down times (Pettijohn and Sacco 2009). The central question of this project is: how universal and time-transcending are these two claims? Do they only apply to 20th and 21st century song lyrics, or do they have historical legitimacy as well? And do these claims only correlate with the genre of pop music, or are they result of a more universal, cross-genre, cognitive pattern? This project studies the rise and fall of song popularity as a function of a song’s (i) form- and (ii) content-based characteristics and relating these results to the socio-cultural context songs arise in, focussing on both historical and contemporary religious and profane songs.
	Dutch song culture is exceptionally well documented and ‘datafied’, and as such this domain is particularly suitable to answer the central research question. The Dutch Song Database (DSD), hosted at the KNAW Meertens Institute, contains data and metadata of approximately 175.000 songs from the Middle Ages up to the 20th century. In contrast, the contemporary Dutch song culture from the 20th and 21st is described in less detail, and an important objective of the proposed project is to compile a representative dataset for the modern era. This dataset will be based on Dutch songs from the last decades, partly collected through crowdsourcing. The songs in the DSD are divided into two top-level genres: profane and religious. The same top-level structure will be used to construct the contemporary dataset. This distinction results in four quadrants, each of which represents a certain group of songs: (i) historical profane songs, (ii) historical religious songs, (iii) contemporary profane songs (pop songs) and (iv) contemporary religious songs (from a Christian tradition).
A particularly thorny challenge is the definition or measure of a song’s popularity. For contemporary profane songs, several hit charts such as Top40 or Spotify charts give insight in the way listeners value a song and the number of times a song is listened to. Regarding the contemporary religious songs, popularity will be defined by investigating the number of times a song is sung in churches or religious meetings. The biggest challenge is the popularity of historical songs: what is the historical equivalent of the modern Top40? The project aims to tackle this issue by approximating early modern hit charts, in which the popularity of historical songs is defined as the interaction of several variables that affect the popularity of a song. Prior studies on popularity of historical textual sources will be used as inspiration (Van der Poel and Grijp 2004; Farmer and Lesser 2005, 2013).
	In a pilot study on the relation between popularity and repetition in historical song lyrics, we quantitatively estimate a song’s degree of repetitiveness using different methods of text compression (Lassche, Karsdorp, and Stronks 2018). Repetition in text can be measured on various dimensions, such as words, lines, characters and word n-grams. We expect that, in relation to the popularity of a song, this dimension of repetition matters. Repetition of letters, for instance, doesn’t affect the popularity of a song, but repetition of words and word n-grams does, especially when it is structured in a repetitive motif (see Example 1). More research is needed to dig deeper into the relation between different kinds of repetition and popularity. This project will elaborate on this pilot study by using repetition as one of the song characteristics to be explored. Other characteristics are charted with for instance topic modelling, in order to determine the different concepts that are subject of the songs and to research how this mirrors the socio-cultural context a song arises in.
The purpose of this project is threefold: first, it investigates the relationship between a song’s characteristics and its popularity. Second, it explores how the popularity of songs is related to the socio-cultural context the songs arise in and whether songs predict or follow developments and changes in this context. Third and finally, by doing so, this project gives insight in the evolution of the concept of popularity.
Example 1. The matrices in Figure 1, 2, 3 and 4 visualize repetition in text. The lyrics of a song are plotted on both axes. Each coordinate corresponds with a certain word in the lyrics. When a word appears on both axes, the corresponding square is black. In Figure 1 the first sentences of ‘Vader Jacob’ are plotted. The word ‘vader’ appears two times, hence the black squares on (1,3) and (3,1). ‘Jacob’ appears on the second and fourth position of the text ((2,4) and (4,2)). The result is a checkerboard representing the repetition of the phrase ‘Vader Jacob’. Figure 2 shows the repetitive structure of a song where each of the ten stanzas ends in the same way. Figure 3 shows a different motif of repetition. To illustrate the difference between structured and unstructured repetition, Figure 4 is added. Although a high level of repetition was measured in this song’s lyrics, the matrix only shows a snowstorm-like effect, which means we are dealing with unstructured repetition.
